---
title: Testing your Operator project
linkTitle: Testing with EnvTest
description: Learn how to ensure the quality of your Operator project 
weight: 70
---

## Overview

The Operator SDK project recommends using controller-runtime's [envtest][envtest] to write tests for your Operators projects. Envtest has a more active contributor community, it is more mature than Operator SDK's test framework, and it does not require an actual cluster to run tests which can be a huge benefit in CI scenarios.

## Using EnvTest

You will see that `controllers/suite_test.go` is created when a controller is scaffolded by the tool. This file contains boilerplate for executing integration tests using [envtest][envtest] with [ginkgo](https://onsi.github.io/ginkgo/) and [gomega][gomega].
Setup instructions, including those for disconnected environments, are found [here][envtest-setup].

These tests are runnable as native Go tests:

```shell
go test controllers/ -v -ginkgo.v
```

The projects generated by using the SDK tool have a Makefile which contains the target tests which executes when you run `make test`. Note that this target will also execute when you run `make docker-build IMG=<some-registry>/<project-name>:<tag>`. 

Operator SDK adopted this stack to write tests for its operators. It might be useful to check [writing controller tests][writing-controller-tests] documentation and examples to learn how to better write tests for your operator. See, for example, that [controller-runtime](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/controller-runtime) is covered by tests using the same stack as well. 

## Other Options

Also you can write tests for your operator in a declarative using the [kuttl][kuttl]. Via kuttl, you can define YAML manifests that specify the expected before and after statues of a cluster when your operator is used. For more info see [Writing Kuttl Scorecard Tests][writing-kuttl-scorecard-tests].

To implement application-specific tests, the SDK's test harness, [scorecard][scorecard], provides the ability to ship custom code in container images as well, which can be referenced in the test suite. Because this test suite definition metadata travels with the Operator Bundle, it allows for functional testing of the Operator without the source code or the project layout being available. See [Writing Custom Scorecard Tests][writing-custom-scorecard-tests].

[envtest]: https://godoc.org/sigs.k8s.io/controller-runtime/pkg/envtest
[envtest-setup]:https://book.kubebuilder.io/reference/envtest.html
[writing-controller-tests]: https://book.kubebuilder.io/cronjob-tutorial/writing-tests.html
[writing-kuttl-scorecard-tests]: /docs/advanced-topics/scorecard/kuttl-tests
[writing-custom-scorecard-tests]: /docs/advanced-topics/scorecard/custom-tests
[scorecard]: /docs/advanced-topics/scorecard/scorecard
[gomega]: https://onsi.github.io/gomega/
[kuttl]: https://kuttl.dev/
